IN the last year or so, the radioactive gas radon has emerged as perhaps the nation's leading environmental threat to health. The risk it poses is lung cancer, and experts at the Environmental Protection Agency estimate that radon may cause 5,000 to 20,000 of the nation's deaths from lung cancer each year. Correction: January 3, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition|IN the last year or so, the radioactive gas radon has emerged as perhaps the nation's leading environmental threat to health. The risk it poses is lung cancer, and experts at the Environmental Protection Agency estimate that radon may cause 5,000 to 20,000 of the nation's deaths from lung cancer each year. IN the last year or so, the radioactive gas radon has emerged as perhaps the nation's leading environmental threat to health. The risk it poses is lung cancer, and experts at the Environmental Protection Agency estimate that radon may cause 5,000 to 20,000 of the nation's deaths from lung cancer each year. The American Cancer Society predicted that in 1986 about 130,000 people would die of lung cancer. Radon's existence outdoors is ubiquitous. It comes from the natural decay chain of uranium 238, which is radioactive and a common element in rock and soil. Outside, radon dissipates quickly and is not regarded as a serious health risk. The hazard, however, arises indoors. In the last two years, scientists became aware that levels in homes can be far higher than ever imagined. The Federal Enviromental Protection Agency said in August that perhaps 8 million of the nation's 70 million homes had radon levels above its recommended guideline. Radon experts in the scientific community are more conservative, saying that the number may be closer to five million. Despite their differing assessments, Government and private scientists stress the need to educate the public, particularly homeowners, on radon's threats. Following are some common questions about radon in the home: Q.Why is radon considered dangerous? A.The gas, which is odorless, invisible and tasteless, is not the culprit. But as it decays, it produces polonium 218 and polonium 214. They both emit radioactive alpha particles that can cling to dust. Inhaled, they can lodge in the lung's sensitive airways and experts say it can possibly cause lung cancer after latency periods of 20 to 30 years. Q.By what process does radon enter homes? A.The gas is sucked in from the soil. Most common pathways are cracks in cellar floors, walls or joints; sump drains; openings around water and gas pipes, and the hollow interiors of cinder blocks. Q.How is it drawn inside the home? A.Most commonly, scientists say, by negative air pressure created inside the home. Q.How does that sort of pressure occur? A.Furnaces and exhaust fans are common causes. As they consume indoor air, interior air pressure drops below the pressure in the ground, creating a suction effect that pulls radon gas from soil in through the minute passageways. Anything that draws air adds to the suction effect, including fireplaces, range hoods, water heaters and washers and dryers. Also, pressure differences can be created by wind, the placement of windows and a home's heating system. Causes are not always obvious, which makes testing important in those areas identified as vulnerable. In homes using well water, any radon in the water can enter via faucets, shower nozzles and dish and clothes washers. But the levels are usually far below those from soil gas, unless the well water itself has very high levels. Water that comes from reservoirs and rivers does not pose a problem, experts say. Q.How do I know what the radon level is in my home? A.You cannot know without having a professional perform a test. Q.Who will perform the testing procedure? A.Commercial testing companies, which usually charge $25 to $50 per each small testing device placed in the home. There are two such devices - charcoal canisters and alpha-track detectors. The testing industry is nascent, so beware of con artists and the unscrupulous. State health and radiation-protection offices have been refining their lists of reputable laboratories and will provide names free. In New York State, call 518-473-3613 or 800-342-3722. In New Jersey, 800-648-0394. In Connecticut, 203-566-8167. In Massachussetts, 617-727-6214. The Environmental Protection Agency's regional offices also have lists of companies. For residents of New Jersey and New York call the E.P.A. New York office, 26 Federal Plaza, New York, N.Y. 10278; 212-224-2514. Residents of New England should contact the E.P.A. Boston office, Room 2203, J.F.K. Federal Buildling, Boston, Mass. O2203; 617-565- 3234. Residents of Pennsylvania, Maryland, Delaware, Washington D.C., Virgina and West Virginia, should contact the E.P.A. Philadelphia office at 841 Chestnut Street, Philadelphia, Pa. 19107; 215-597-8320 These E.P.A. offices can also provide two free up-to-date booklets on radon, ''A Citizen's Guide to Radon: What It Is and What to Do About It'' and ''Radon Reduction Methods: A Homeowner's Guide.'' Q.What indoor radon levels concern scientists? A.There is disagreement here. E.P.A.'s guideline is 4 picocuries of radon per liter of air. Anything above that should be reduced, the agency says. Private experts think that level is too alarmist. Dr. Naomi Harley, a radiation expert and professor of environmental medicine at the New York University Medical Center, says the guideline should be 8 picocuries per liter. Experts do agree, however, that homes with high levels of radon need immediate attention, while those with levels under 8 or 10 picocuries are not as urgent. Q.What is a measuring unit called a picocurie? A.A picocurie is a measurement of airborne radon gas. It is one-trillionth of a curie and represents the decay of two radon atoms per minute. Q.Is there another type of measurement? A.Yes, another measurement is called ''working levels,'' or WL. A ''working level'' is a measure of radon's alpha-emitting decay products, polonium 218 and polonium 214. The two methods of measurement are interchangeable. It is important to know how to figure both, as some private radon-testing laboratories use only one or the other. There are 200 picocuries per 1 working level. To convert a picocurie measurement to WL, divide the picocurie reading by 200. Thus, 200 picocuries is the same as 1 WL. The E.P.A. standard of 4 picocuries per liter of air is .02 WL. Q.Are indoor levels of the gas constant? A.No. They are highest at cellar or ground-level entry points and decline on upper floors. They can also vary day-to-day and season-to-season. So, a longer testing period, preferably months, gives a better average reading. Levels in neighboring houses can vary widely, depending on differences in construction and soil textures. Q.What levels of radon cause cancer? A.This cannot be predicted with absolute certainty. But obviously the higher the level, the greater the danger. The E.P.A. estimates ranges of fatal lung cancers for various radon levels. These risks presuppose a person being exposed to a particular level for 75 percent of the time for 70 years. Critics argue that this exposure time is unrealistic, but Government specialists say they want to be conservative. The E.P.A. estimates that if 1,000 people are exposed to a level of 4 picocuries for 75 percent of the time for 70 years, 13 to 50 of them will contract fatal lung cancer. In homes with levels of 10 picocuries, of which experts estimate there are 700,000 nationally, the death risk increases to from 30 to 120 for each 1,000 people exposed. Scientific experts like Dr. Harley argue that those ratios are far too high. Based on studies of uranium miners, Dr. Harley says the 4-picocurie per liter standard's death risk is 9 per thousand people for a lifelong exposure. Despite this disagreement, Federal and scientific experts agree that radon is a greater risk than more widely publicized threats like asbestos, toxic waste dumps and dioxin. Q.Will states perform tests in homes? A.By winter's end, the New York State Department of Health plans to start a $3 million testing program for thousands of homes. Homeowners able to prove by receipts that they initiated energy conservation measures in the home can get free detectors; others will pay about $20, officials say. Q.Are states looking for hot spots? A.Many have begun investigations. New York State recently projected - based on a sample of 2,400 homes - that 95 percent of the 2.6 million single-family homes across the state have radon levels at or below the Federal guideline of four picocuries per liter. Officials said, however, that the sampling could not rule out the existence of localized radon hot spots. New Jersey plans to test 6,000 buildings statewide in coming months and Connecticut 1,500. The worst known hot spot in the country is Clinton, N.J., a rural town of about 2,000 15 miles east of the Delaware River. There 105 homes atop a uranium-laden limestone cliff had readings above the E.P.A.'s 4 picocurie per liter standard. Of them, 35 were at or above 200 picocuries and 5 were above 1,000. Q.What was done as a result of those readings? A.Since late spring, the E.P.A. has turned 10 homes with the highest levels into a research laboratory, testing and perfecting technology to reduce the radon. They are pleased with the results. Six of the 10 now have levels below the standard, according to Alfred B. Craig, head of the E.P.A. research team. Q.What methods were found successful? A.A reduction system called ''sub-slab ventilation.'' Several pipes were placed through the cellar floors into gravel bases beneath them and then linked to a single pipe running upward in the home to the roof. An exhaust fan atop the roof outlet drew the radon up through the piping and out into the air. Professional installation of this system can cost up to $3,000. It was done free in Clinton as an experiment. Q.What are other reduction methods? A.The Environmental Protection Agency's booklet ''Radon Reduction Methods'' outlines nine, their likely cost and their effectiveness. Marginal or low radon readings can usually be reduced by sealing basement walls and floor cracks and covering drain and utility pipe openings, covering exposed soil and using natural or forced ventilation. Professional advice is usually necessary and success of any measures should be verified by retesting. For homes with readings of 10 picocuries or less, Mr. Craig reports considerable success with a ventilation system called the air-to-air heat exchanger that expels contaminated air and replaces it with an equal amount of fresh outside air. Described in the E.P.A. booklet, the cost ranges from $400 to $1,500. Q.If I'm buying a home, should I get an inspection? A.The experts advise yes. Most predict that a radon inspection one day will be as commonplace in housing sales as a termite inspection. The National Association of Realtors says that a sales agent must inform a buyer if the agent believes a home is in a radon-prone area. Failure of a sales agent to tell a buyer facts affecting a home's value, including past radon detection, could violate the association's code of ethics and expose the agent to civil suit, according to Walter Molony, an association spokesman. Correction:  January 3, 1987, Saturday, Late City Final Edition
